ABDALLAH THE UNHAPPY.

[Illustration]


A great many years ago there dwelt in a city of the East, of which you
have never heard the name, a wise and holy man. He was highly esteemed
by his fellow citizens, for he was kind and benevolent, never refusing
good counsel to those in earnest to profit by it, so that by degrees the
fame of his sagacity spread far and wide, and many came from great
distances to consult him.

One day he was sitting in front of his modest dwelling, enjoying the
soft breeze that stirred the trees hard by, reading from time to time
short passages of an ancient volume open upon his knees, when a shadow
fell across its pages, and looking up, he perceived that a stranger
stood before him, who saluted him with the greatest respect and
courtesy. The sage returned the customary greetings, and then inquired
in what he could be of service to the new-comer.

"Father," said the stranger, "I have journeyed far to ask your advice.
My quest is summed up in few words, What can I do to be happy?"

[Illustration]

The wise man looked at him searchingly. He was a handsome man in the
prime of life, richly dressed, healthy and vigorous. His appearance
would have been most prepossessing but for a melancholy and discontented
expression of countenance--there was no genial smile about the mouth, no
kindly light in the eyes.

"What have you tried?" inquired the sage.

"Everything," replied the stranger. "Yet without foolish prodigality and
excess. I have sought to surround myself with beauty and refinement, for
my wealth is inexhaustible. I have dipped deep into learning, for my
abilities are, I am told, considerable; I have even of late in a sort of
despair tried to find content in enjoyment of less elevated kinds, such
as seems to satisfy many men. But all was useless--eating and drinking,
and such physical gratifications could do nothing for one who had sought
in vain satisfaction in the perfection of music, of painting and
sculpture--nay, more, who had found in the severest of studies but
weariness and disappointment."

[Illustration]

"You have been too changeable and impatient, my son," said the sage.
"Try again--I do not say return to the lower pleasures of which you
speak, but devote yourself more exclusively to the fine arts. Travel far
and wide and visit whatever is beautiful. One year from now, return, and
tell me the result."

Abdallah bowed and departed. The year passed, and again he stood before
the sage, despondent as formerly.

"In vain. I have exhausted myself in travel. I have seen all the world
has to show. I am more miserable than ever."

"Turn then again to study. Shut yourself up with your books. Work your
hardest and see if therein you cannot find contentment. If you succeed I
shall not expect to see you again."

But some days before the year had elapsed, there once more stood
Abdallah. He had grown thin and pale, his eyes told of midnight vigils,
but their expression was no happier.

"It is useless," he said. "I have followed your advice. But I am not as
other men. _Nothing_ brings happiness to me. There is but one thing to
do, but first I would ask your permission. Let me make an end of
myself."

The sage frowned.

[Illustration]

"It must be as you say," he replied after some moments' silence. "You
are perhaps so constituted that happiness is impossible for you. If so,
resignation is all that remains. But I cannot at once sanction your
desire to quit this life. I must reflect upon it during a year. In the
meantime consider the struggle as given up; think no more of your
unhappy fate, but as you are about to die, use the time that remains, to
some purpose, by spending it for others. You are the one wretched
exception--so be it. Spend your time, your strength and your wealth in
making some others--ordinary human beings--happier, so that at least
some few tears may be dropped on your grave. Return in a year, and I
will then authorize you to put an end to yourself."

And Abdallah again bowed and withdrew, somewhat consoled by the thought
that one year would see the last of his wretched existence, that even
the wisest of men recognised him as cut off from the common lot.

The year passed. But no Abdallah returned. It was not till some weeks
after the appointed time that he appeared hastening eagerly towards the
sage's dwelling. He was no longer thin or pale, his dress was much less
rich than formerly, but seemed nevertheless to show his handsome figure
to all the greater advantage, his bearing was upright, his step
springing--there was a smile on his lips, a beautiful, kindly light in
his dark eyes.

"Forgive me, father, for my delay," he cried. "I could not believe the
time had passed. This year has seemed to fly."

"And you are ready to part with your life?" asked the sage.

Tears rushed to Abdallah's eyes.

"If the sacrifice could be of use to others, yes, father, I am ready,"
he replied. "But for myself, no, a thousand times no. I have found the
secret of happiness. In ministering to others, in forgetfulness of self,
I have found my own blessedness. Life is to me now the most precious of
gifts--my wealth, my strength, nay the very learning, the very
cultivation I found so disappointing when unshared, I now esteem most
highly as increasing my capacities for doing good. Life is beautiful--O
good father, let me live."

And the wise man lifting his hands in benediction on the head of the
happy Abdallah, bade him go in peace, having entered upon the one only
path of endless and eternal blessedness.
